Welcome back, and we are still in Proverbs 7, and we're going to read verses 22 through 27, Proverbs chapter 7.
So let's get started.
Suddenly follows her as an ox goes to the slaughter, or is one in fetters to the discipline of a fool, until an arrow pierces through his liver as a bird hastens to the snare
so he does not know that it will cost him his life.
Now therefore my sons, listen to me and pay attention to the words of my mouth.
Do not let your heart turn aside to her ways.
Do not stray into her paths.
For many are the victims she has cast down and numerous are all her slain.
Her house is in the way of shield descending to the chambers of death.
Let's go to the Lord in prayer.
Father, we read this passage and Lord, my heart trembles at the dangers that are in this world.
It's temptations and Lord that many men and women
Many youths have fallen as a result of the evil one who is like a roaring lion seeking who he may devour, as a result of listening to the world and its temptations.
Father, I pray for those who will listen to this short devotional Lord that they will not mock
or think that I'm exaggerating, that they would recognize that you would show them the dangers of sin, the need to cling to Christ, the need to saturate their lives in the Word of God.
Father, help us now as we go into this text.
In Jesus' name, amen.
When you look at verse 22, you see that the consequences of sin can be very, very severe and ox being slaughtered, a man being marched off in fetters, possibly to his death, an arrow piercing through the liver, a bird trapped in a snare.
And, you know, of all the things, I think that would be terrifying.
is we look at this bird trapped in a snare.
No one should think about that for a moment.
When a bird is snared, usually by the foot or the wing, they're very conscious.
I mean, they're aware that they're trapped.
And I always think about that, to being caught in a trap, keenly aware and having to wait.
Because sometimes when you set traps, or as a little boy, you set traps,
You go back to those traps, you know, in 24 hours and 36 hours.
And so to be captured and know you're captured.
And now you have to wait and wait and wait.
You're doomed.
And then you hear the footsteps approach of the hunter.
And there's nothing that you can do about it.
That's the severity of what's being said here.
And that's the reason for the warning in verse 24.
Now therefore my son listened to me and pay attention to the words of my mouth.
We had a lot of cattle, but there was one in particular, wasn't even a bull.
It was a cow and her brand was U-14.
I mean, I was a little boy and I still remember that cow, U-14.
She was mean.
She was worth a lot of money, but she was mean.
If she hadn't been worth money, my dad would have put her down.
She got my mom one time.
Several times she almost got me.
And I remember when my dad first pointed her out, he says, you need to be careful with that one.
And like, I'm not paying much attention.
You have to be careful with everything.
And he goes, no, boy, listen to me.
She'll get you.
she will get you.
So you have to be extraordinarily careful with that cow.
Even when you're on horseback, you need to be careful with this one.
And I remember just how serious he looked in his face.
And I mean, it communicated to me, Hey, this is one to watch out for.
Well, that's what's going on here.
Now, therefore my sons listen to me and pay attention.
to the words of my mouth.
Now, I want you to look at something.
Now, it says, based on how deadly this is, he says, now, after all that I've explained to you about how deadly this sin is, about how it can destroy your life, about how it can destroy you in eternity, based on all that.
Now,
So you're never, you're never really going to respond correctly unless you understand how deadly sin is.
And he's done everything to explain it.
And he says, now based on that, listen to me and pay attention to the words of my mouth and do not let your heart turn aside to her ways and do not stray into her path.
And verse 24, listen to me, pay attention.
You realize what's going on here.
It's kind of like a Hebrew parallelism.
He's stating it and then he's stating it again.
He's just repeating it in a little bit different way in order to bring out more meaning and to draw attention to how serious this is.
He says, give heed to what you have learned.
Now, one of the things that's important here is
If you were sitting with me right now and you were shaking your head.
Yes.
I'd go, you know, you shake your head all day long.
Uh, not appreciate that.
But if you don't listen, if you don't actually live this, if you don't actually respond to it, if you just say, yes, it's true.
It's not enough.
You have to really feel it.
You have to have a sense
of danger around sin.
You do?
Just like my dad was telling me, when you get near that cow, when you get in the same pin with her, you, beyond the alert, all your senses need to be firing because she'll get you.
All right, it's the same way here.
It's not just enough to say, oh, yeah, I understand.
No, you need to feel it.
Now, here in verse 24, he said, listen,
In the Bible, this almost, this almost always carries the idea of listen and obey.
It's two sides of the same coin.
If you don't obey, you haven't listened and you really need to understand that.
That's why your parents will tell you something.
You'll, you'll ascend to it.
Yes.
Okay.
And then you'll go violate what they told you.
And what do they say?
Didn't you listen to me?
Listening in the scripture.
implies obedience.
Two sides of the same coin.
You can't have one without the other.
And then he comes back and he not only says, listen, he says, pay attention.
We've looked at this word several times, but it's worth revisiting it.
The idea here is that of you're leaning into it.
Okay?
You're trying with all your mental faculty to understand what's being said and understand the significance of it.
It's the idea of expenditure of mental energy.
It's focus.
Someone says, look, it's a life-death situation.
You need to listen to me and then you start leaning in.
You're focusing.
That's the idea.
It's like,
When, when you see a deer or something in the field and it's way, way off and you're hunting with your son and you go, there he is.
And the boy can't see it and you go, look, there it is.
Or when you're shooting with a bow, you, you lean in because you're concentrating everything that you have on that target.
He's saying, look above all things.
Listen to me.
And this is so important.
You know most people, most young people, most old people, they begin their day, they just get out of bed and take off running.
That's a very dangerous thing to do.
Your priority ought to be knowledge of God and knowledge of God's Word and knowledge of God's guidance through this very, very dangerous minefield of a life, okay?
Now he says, listen, pay attention.
And then what else does he say?
Guard your heart and your feet.
Do not let your heart turn aside to her ways.
Do not stray into her path, her paths.
Well, when it says paths, realize she's walking around all over the place.
There's danger everywhere.
Now the heart here in verse 25,
The heart refers to the control center, your control center.
It controls your will, your emotions, your actions.
Now, it's always, listen to me, it is always a matter of the heart.
If you guard your heart, your feet will follow.
If you guard your heart, your hands will follow.
If you guard your heart, your speech will follow.
It's always a matter of the heart.
Guard your heart.
And how do you do that?
First of all, you may say, well, how do I do that?
I do it by reading the word.
No.
First of all, you do it by not listening to certain things.
And then by listening to others, you do not listen to the world.
You listen to God.
Because you see it doesn't matter how many times you take a shower if you keep jumping in a sewer You keep jumping in the sewer you may have to take a shower 25 times a day and you're still filthy Yes, I want you to read the word I want you to memorize the word I want you to meditate on the word let the word of God be a lamp unto your feet But if soon as you're leaving the word you're just going and contaminating yourself on your iPhone or your computer and
or getting into ungodly conversations or you're in relationships with people who are going to have a negative impact on you.
I'm not going to say the word won't have an impact because it will, but what I will tell you is it'll have less of an impact.
So guard your heart.
It's always a matter of the heart.
I've written here, if you turn your feet to the path of sin, it is because you have already turned your heart away from God.
Let me read that again.
If you turn your feet to the pack of sin and your hands to doing sin and your mouth to speaking sin, it is because you've already turned your heart from God.
Guard your heart.
You know, I was traveling to the airport the other day and you know, you have to be careful when you're walking through an airport.
You know why?
because everyone is walking and still looking at their phone.
And I mean, they will flat out run you over.
It is an addiction.
It is horrific what's going on.
And everything that's being pulled up, that is contrary to the word of God, it's turning your heart from God, and which means it's eventually turning everything else about you.
from God.
Now, how do we guard our heart?
Psalms 1 19 11.
Your word, I have treasured in my heart that I may not sin against you.
It's pretty simple, isn't it?
Let's just reverse it.
Your word, I have not treasured in my heart so that I may sin against you.
I heard a preacher one time say, if I'm not in the word one day, I know it.
If I'm not in the word two days, my wife knows it.
If I'm not in the word three days, my associates know it.
If I'm not in the word four days, everybody knows it.
Psalms 37, 31, the law of his God is in his heart.
His steps do not slip.
Why do his steps not slip?
Because the word of God is in his heart.
Look, I remember one time I said something and a guy, he was really sarcastic.
I said one of the great necessity of the day, the thing that would promote holiness among God's people is just to spend time in the word and prayer.
And he said,
Well, that's kind of a simplistic solution, don't you think?
I said, well, let me ask you a question.
How much time do you spend in the Word of God in prayer?
He really couldn't give an answer.
I said, enough said, isn't it?
You know, the Christian life really honestly is not that complex.
It's not.
It's difficult, but it's not that complex.
There's no song we used to sing.
Even when I was a kid in church trust and obey for there's no other way to be happy in Jesus, but to trust and obey Learn the word trust the word obey the word Again, enough said So few people actually spend any significant time
in the Scriptures.
Young person, if you want to be extraordinary, not just in the ministry, not just in church, but in every aspect of life, then you need to get in the Word of God.
Even if you go to a great church with a great preacher, that's not enough.
First of all, the greatest preacher is just a man.
You need to come in direct contact with infallible Word.
And that is only found in the scriptures.
You know, even listening to me, you have the responsibility to study the word and ask yourself, what brother Paul is saying?
Is it true?
I want to communicate truth.
I want to be sincere.
I want to be a true teacher, but I'm just a man.
You owe it to yourself, but you also owe it to me to study the Word of God so that when I need correction, you can correct.
So that if I say something that's not right, you can discern it and realize it has no binding on you.
You must study the Word of God.
Now, I want to, I want to end right there and
Because I want you to realize something.
The only way you're going to avoid the calamity of this young man is to saturate your life in the Scriptures.
You ever seen a towel saturated with water?
You pick it up, water is dripping out of it everywhere.
That's the way you need to be, that the Word of God is just your life.
Young people, there's a lot of people today and they love the Lord, but all they talk about is how many books they've read.
Now I've read a few books myself and I appreciate good books, but all the books in the world added up are nothing compared to the Scriptures.
and studying the scriptures.
No book has the power to change you, transform you like the scriptures.
I could quote off many authors right now that I greatly appreciate.
Charles Spurgeon, Martin Lloyd Jones, John Flaval, John Owen, Jonathan Edwards, sermons of Whitfield, Robert Murray McShane, his memoirs, Samuel Rutherford.
There are so many
They can't hold a candle.
They can't hold a candle to the inspired Word of God.
If you want to have power for life and ministry, then make the Word of God.
Your food.
Let's pray.
Father, thank you for the Word.
And I pray, Lord, that you would create an insatiable hunger for the Word of God in your people, especially for those young people who are listening to this teaching.
I ask this in Jesus' name.
Amen.